---
title: Dual Boot or Virtual Machine? Easy, both!
author: mp1994
date: 2022-03-05
category: 2boot
tags: 2boot, dual boot, kvm, linux, vm
layout: post
published: true
---

At the starting of my PhD in Bioengineering, back in 2019, I was running a 6-years-old MacBook Air. It served me well during my bachelors and my masters, but an upgrade was overdue. I needed a laptop for work. I did not want to use Windows. I really could not go back. I chose the new Dell XPS 13, the developer edition that runs Ubuntu (18.04) LTS out of the box. A great option to save some bucks, if you don't need Windows or you can get a license at work.

Let's be honest here. Either you like it or not, you still _need_ Windows. I have some Windows-only software that I need to run (e.g., PSoC Creator). There is also software that does not run (as well as on Windows) on Linux. Everything developed by Microsoft, for example. Office 365 is quite good these days, and well integrated with OneDrive. The web version just sucks. So here I am, downloading the Windows 10 ISO on my brand-new Ubuntu-powered laptop. Is it over already? 

### Virtualization -vs- Dual Boot

We all know we have two options. If you have enough _under the hood_, you can just virtualize Windows and run it inside Linux. This option is fine when you need to use Windows-based programs once in a while, a few apps at a time (by the way, I already recommend checking out [WinApps](https://github.com/Fmstrat/winapps). The _dual_ option (pun intended) is setting up a dual boot. If you are not limited by disk space here, you can just reboot and fire up Windows, enjoying bare-metal performance. This makes sense if one day you need to work on Windows, and you have there everything you need. This may result in frustratingly having to reboot several times per day.

There are many factors to include trying to figure out what's best: energy efficiency, memory efficiency, computational power, flexibility... So then I figured, I could have both. Dual boot Windows and Linux, and have a Windows VM inside Linux. Do I like this solution? No. I started wondering: _can I virtualize my Windows partition?_ So I started digging online... and this come out.

As of the time of writing, I am _successfully_ running what I have been calling __2Boot__. It's like Dual Boot v2.0. I have Ubuntu 18.04 LTS and Windows 10, side-by-side in a classic dual boot configuration. What's _special_ (if anything) is that I can virtualize my Windows partition and fire up _the very same Win10 machine_ as a virtual machine inside Linux, with all the data and programs installed. This is great for flexibility and memory efficiency: not a single precious GB of the NVME SSD is wasted on a Virtual Disk Image.

This post is already quite long. So I will split it into several posts that will go under the category [2boot](/2boot/). Stay tuned!